you're going to fail if your plan is to
rely on natural Talent OR mindlessly
clocking 10,000 hours if you want an
outrageous amount of success you're
going to have to throw away most of what
you know and build a real path to
Mastery there is a reason that most of
you will die with your potential still
trapped inside of you but I'm joined
today by bestselling author and
celebrated Professor Adam Grant and our
goal is to map out the exact path you
can walk to beat the odds and be
celebrated in Valhalla
somehow the growth mindset has become
controversial because despite how many
of us preach it people are still
struggling so what is it that all of us
are getting wrong about self-help I
actually studied this with um Amy resesi
and Justin Berg we did an experiment at
a tech company where we tried to teach
people growth mindset um and have them
think about what skills do you want to
develop take maybe some talents that you
thought were fixed will get you to
reframe them as flexible and we found
that that alone didn't change their
happiness and it didn't boost their job
performance we needed to do something
extra for them which is um have them
change the environment around them so
there was a a group of people who got
randomly assigned not only to think
about themselves as you know as
malleable but also their jobs as
malleable so think about your job as you
know as a basically a set of of tasks
and interactions um those are building
blocks uh they probably weren't designed
for you right it's a job description
that was written by somebody else but
you could change the size of those
blocks you can make some of them bigger
you can make some of them smaller you
could bring in strengths that maybe
weren't designed into your job and and
try to do what Amy and Jane Dutton have
called job crafting where you become an
active architect to your job and and you
actually customize it to try to better
suit your your capabilities that you
have and the ones you want to develop
and it turns out that if we give you
that growth mindset about your job as
well as your skills you see a
sustainable boost in your happiness over
the next six months at work um there's
no cost to your performance and there
might even be some gains and so I think
the the idea here is to say let's not
just look inward at changing our
ourselves we also need to to alter our
context to better fit where we're trying
to grow so I'll take a slightly
different read on that as somebody that
my All of My Success is predicated on
the adoption of a growth mindset what I
realized was when I didn't think I could
get better it had a radical impact on
all of my Downstream behaviors so
ultimately only your behaviors matter so
you can do the right thing for the wrong
reason you're still going to get the
right result but if you understand that
all of those behaviors are Downstream of
the things that you believe to be true
then you realize okay the thing I
actually need to tackle is it is an
internal job as far as I can tell that
because if I don't believe that I can
get better at something or I don't
believe that I can shape my job then I
won't try so self-filling prophecy
exactly when I think about okay how do
we make lasting change in somebody that
wants to change that's the first thing I
go to you have to adopt the only belief
that matters you have to believe if you
put time and energy into getting better
better at something you will actually
get better and it's interesting you're
actually making me rethink cuz I always
say that that if you put time and energy
into getting better you'll get better
but there is a secondary part that I
think you're getting at here which is I
have to believe that I can shape things
to my will now the interesting thing is
that's what I always call power I don't
know how you feel about the word power
that one's also become a little
controversial I didn't grow up in an
eror where that word was weird so like
I'm so comfortable but to me that's
personal power you close your eyes you
imagine a world better than this one you
open your eyes and you acquire the
skills necessary to actually go and
execute and get the skills you need to
do the things you want to do and so I
often remind my team because the way I
came up I didn't start I didn't found my
first company until IID worked my way up
from uh copywriter to partner and so I'm
like I'm not the CEO and that's why I
think like this I became the CEO because
I think like this and so the way that
you really get ahead is to just act as
if you can completely change everything
in front of you you can change your job
you can persuade people to see things
your way you're not always going to pull
it off but if you believe it's doable
then you'll behave accordingly I think
that what you're calling power could
also be seen as agency right which is I
have the the freedom and the leeway to
shape my environment I'm not a a
sculpture of my context I'm actually a
sculptor of it and I think we we all
need that I think the the other thing is
I I think you're making important
distinction that growth mindset is not
it's not a Magic Bullet it's not a
Panacea but the absence of one can be
devastating so if I have a completely
fixed mindset it's really hard to
imagine that I'm going to operate to try
to change my environment um because I'm
kind of I believe that I'm stuck with it
and I think that that's that's a a
really reasonable place to land um I
wonder I'm just I'm thinking out loud
here are we allowed to think out loud I
think you know I like that I I think you
like it I like like it too and I I feel
like I don't do enough of it because my
job as an organizational psychologist is
to start with the evidence and like okay
here's what the evidence says but the
evidence always leaves questions
unanswered and so let's let's think this
throughout loud so um you think about
belief as a driver of behavior I think
that's right I think Behavior also can
reinforce your beliefs and so this can
become a a virtuous cycle over time so
you you start out thinking I can change
my environment um and I can improve
myself then you act in ways that that
basically confirm that and then you get
feedback from your environment that says
wait a minute that worked let me do more
of that and so you might be somebody who
feels like opportunity hasn't knocked
and you realize maybe there's a way I
can build a door okay that is one of the
driving forces in the book that you've
written hidden potential as soon as I
saw the topic I was like between the
topic and you this is definitely going
to be one that I'm excited to explore uh
but what I want to know is why does
potential remain hidden are there myths
or BS that people propagate and look it
I'm perfectly happy if I'm like telling
people something that ultimately doesn't
work then I will immediately get rid of
that all I care about is creating actual
impact on people so uh you need not pull
punches so I in fact I will ask for
advice I don't know how much you know
about the things I I spout but what are
the the misconceptions that people have
what's the [__] that people are
spreading that actually leaves people
with the the potential dormant I think
the great myth of potential is that you
can judge where people will Land by
where they start we do this to ourselves
we do this to others constantly um the
assumption is if you're a natural if
you're a prodigy then you're going to go
on to do great things and if you
struggle at first if a task doesn't come
easily to you then you might as well
give up and look elsewhere um I think
you're you're living proof that's not
true but there's also a lot of science
that that backs it up so one of my
favorite studies looked at World Class
athletes scientists artists and
musicians um trying to figure out when
could you see their potential and it
turned out that the vast majority of
them people at the very top of every
field um did not stand out when they
were young um their teachers did not
necessarily think they were anything
special their coaches didn't and neither
did their own parents in some cases
which I want to have a conversation with
those parents later but um it's it's
staggering that when they did stand out
they stood out more for unusual
motivation than unusual ability
and I think what that tells us is yeah
everybody starts at a different place
but ultimately the question of potential
is the distance you can travel um as
opposed to you know what's what's the
natural level of aptitude that you were
born into or that you locked into so
that to me is the the starting myth that
that gets a lot of people in
trouble okay so the one stat that I've
heard that um seems odd given that is
that a lot of times professional
athletes end up being I think you even
talk about this in the book end up being
towards the older bigger in their class
uh I always thought then the knock on
effect of that is that they're
outperforming they are more confident
they get more attention from the coaches
but then I would assume that they people
would be like oh that kids really got it
yep but that's not true at least that's
not what you just said so it's I would
say it's incomplete so you can tell that
story and that will explain a bunch of
people's trajectories um and those
people those kids weren't at the
beginning better right they just had the
natural ADV of being older and therefore
being bigger and stronger and faster and
smarter um I think though that there are
two wrinkles that you get out of the
table so one is um if you look at the
hockey data uh so it's true that if a
hockey player is born in January or
February significantly more likely to
become a star make the NHL what we don't
talk about is the fact that the later
you're born as a hockey player if you do
make it the more successful you become
so the November and December bursts at
the end of the year they do have lower
odds of getting there if they can break
through they have a greater shot at
becoming all star caliber players and I
think part of that is some people would
say well they had to be that much better
to begin with to make it I think that
might be part of the story but I think
there's also a piece of the story that
says you know what they had to learn to
get that much better in order to
overcome the obstacles that they were
facing so I think that's that's one big
wrinkle um that we don't we don't talk
about that overlooked group that you
know is overlooked um they're underdogs
they tend to be you know in a lot of
cases later Bloomers but they ultimately
make it and sometimes rise to Greater
Heights uh I think that's that's
probably the first principle the second
principle is if you look at the the
brand new data on um this is also mn's
work Brooke mnea what she and her
colleague shows that uh the elite junior
athletes are less likely to make it to
world class and so there's one group of
kids that basically specializes early um
they go all in on a sport um they Peak
fast and then they burn out um and
sometimes they burn out because uh
they're just exhausted mentally in other
cases they burn out because they they
literally pound the pavement so hard
that their bodies can't handle it
anymore whereas the kids who wait longer
to specialize who delay that Focus they
end up um you know sort of they end up
Rising slower but ultimately they're
more likely to get to the very top of
international competitions uh and I
think there's there's a case to be made
there that what we need is a sampling
period which is we try out a bunch of
activities we figure out where maybe
some of our our skills lie but also
where our motivation lies but also the
cross training pays off over time and so
I guess there's a there's a second story
that people tell here which is okay if
you're not a natural Talent believer
then you're a hard work believer and
your story is if you worship at the
altar of uh the altar of hustle if you
pray to the high priest of grit then
you're done like no it's not about how
hard you work it's about how well you
learn um and we've all heard cliches
about working smarter not working harder
um but I think the actual skills
involved in working smarter get far too
little attention so what do you make of
all that uh so you're taking notes you
have multiple reactions I care well I'm
taking notes on things that we will
definitely get to um but first on that
particular I'm going to put it in a work
context for a second which is a if you
think of business as a sport which I do
then this will connect directly um I
consider business the only sport that
you don't from a bodily standpoint you
don't have a a clock on you look at
Warren Buffett still going he's in his
80s right so it's really an
extraordinary thing that you can play as
long as you want to play um but I think
that people need to work long hard and
smart
and people will inevitably push back on
me and they'll say Tom if I'm working
hard and smart why do I have to also
work long hours and my answer is because
you're going to go up against me and I'm
doing all three and obviously I've read
your book I've heard you talk so I know
some of the punchline is that play is an
incredibly important part of this and so
of course I agree with you
wholeheartedly and so I'll I'll add a
fourth thing and say you need to work
long hard and smart at something that
you are obsessed with
so for me I've literally structured my
life to be I mean as close to play as
you're going to get I mean we're in your
garage right now right we are
technically in my garage though I
respond violently to that cuz I don't
like cars uh so but my thing is I've
really tried to handcraft my life to be
the things that I love so for instance
um if I'm playing Minecraft right now I
would be playing it as a way to learn
because we're building a video game okay
that's not an accident our video game is
done in a style of gaming meets anime
that's not an accident those are the
things that I love uh we make comics why
because I read Comics right we make
comics in the style of manwa why because
I love manga anybody anybody that
understands that connection will get it
but it's like okay so my life is really
me
asking if I didn't have to worry about
money what would I do and then try to
make money off that thing but I really
do feel like if you want to be one of
the greats man and maybe people don't
and I hear that but I'm just saying if
you want to be one of the greats you
really are going to have to go that
hard yeah I don't think I disagree with
that I think I think what you're talking
about is being an outlier um at the very
extreme of success I don't want that to
be true but I worry that it is I mean I
think look yeah if you want to be at the
very top of where you're going there's
no question that you're going to have to
work hard as part of it um I would say
hard work is not enough number one we
know that and number two there is such a
thing as as overworking to the point
that you either kill your motivation or
you undermine your own creativity and
what you do see I think I think we can
make a pretty compelling case that
there's a trade-off at some point
between quantity and quality and so the
21st hour that you're putting in the day
is probably less valuable than sleep
that's interesting so let's map that out
uh I believe the most important thing
well go okay God uh I'm going to talk
from a behavior standpoint not from a
punchline of Life the punch line of life
is fulfillment it's love it's all the
beautiful things that life has offer but
within the context of I love how you
just made that a disclaimer by the way
yes of course the things that matter
we're not going to talk about but let's
talk about this stuff we will get to
those but just to to map the edges of
this for a second so with within those
confines of knowing I'm talking
behaviors right now sleep is the most
important so I didn't want to say
sleep's the most important and then
people are like oh [__] You Like Love is
All That Matters yes I get it I'm just
talking behaviors if you don't get sleep
you will not optimize your brain so
anytime that I or anybody else start to
diminish their sleep then I'm like you
have a problem uh just because you won't
be a even if your goal is just to work
as hard as humanly possible you will
begin to diminish your ability to do
that you will get brain fog you won't be
able to focus like I have to imagine
though you'll probably know the science
of this that you can measure a decrease
in
IQ if you're fatigued oh easy yeah yeah
although you know there are ways to
upset that too so one of my favorite
studies that didn't make the book um and
this is I think worth a quick detour
there was a this was a HRI at all paper
um they did a NASA simulation with
flight Crews and it turned out that
flight Crews that were exhausted um
actually made um fewer potentially
catastrophic errors uh in their fewer
fewer if they'd flown together before
than a brand new crew with no shared
flying experience okay but what about a
well-rested team that's flown together
that would probably be the best of both
world okay that's interesting so they're
saying that the if you don't know each
other well enough that's worse than
being tired yeah and maybe there's a
greater loss to collective intelligence
that comes from not knowing each other's
strengths and weaknesses not having
effective routines not having Norms
where you're allowed to challenge each
other if you see a problem but I think
I'm 100% with you I would bet on the
well-rested crew that has shared
experience that's really interesting
okay so go back to sleep sleep is the
most important behavior from your
perspective so you don't want to
compromise that yes correct okay but
everything else you have a system that's
basically laser focused on what your
professional goals are yes so I I'm huge
into whatever is going to optimize my
cognition so I eat right uh I meditate I
work out all of that stuff which many of
those things I do only because they are
good for cognitive optimization it isn't
something that I intrinsically enjoy I
will say meditation is in and of itself
it's pleasurable for me so that that one
I really like and would do occasionally
even if I didn't think it was moving me
forward um but yeah so that I I
definitely do all of that stuff to
optimize but then beyond that I really
resonate with somebody like Kobe Bryant
who's like look if I'm in the gym for
six hours a day and you're only in the
gym for two hours a day I'm going to eat
you alive like I will just be so far
ahead of you you know Three Seasons Four
Seasons Five Seasons in um I think the
same is true of business look I'm I'm
only so smart so if I can't tune my
genetic dials I have to find the other
dials that I can tune and effort is
certainly one duration is another um and
then just the steady accumulation of
skills since they stack would be another
I think I'm on board with all that I
think the one thing I worry about is the
I guess a little bit of a productivity
creativity trade-off so you you raise
your attentional filters you block out
all the things that might be
distractions your productivity goes up
your learning in the core domain goes up
you also lose out on Eureka moments and
unexpected connections and so the very
thing that seems to interfere with your
productivity the lowering the
attentional filters um lets unexpected
ideas in um and it sounds like you're
you're designing for some of that by
exploring in adjacent areas that you're
working in and I think there's probably
a benefit there but I also wonder like
what's what can you systematize like I I
think Da Vinci probably put it best when
he said like so I don't know the exact
translation but it was something like
you can't produce a work of Genius
according to a schedule or an outline
and maybe you're just comfortable
letting go of breakthrough radical
Innovation and doing you know kind of
more incremental Innovation which
actually is probably a more more
sustainable path to building a
successful business but how do you think
about that trade-off okay so two things
there's the Seth Goden response which I
love or no actually I can't remember it
was either Seth Goden or Chuck penck
those two could more different but I
have no idea why both those
neurons uh but they said there is no
such thing as writer block you when
you're on a deadline you just have to
get it done and I'm yeah I agree with
that the other thing though I will say
is that I really get driven crazy when
people say uh I'm overwhelmed then do
less so I think people ought to be able
to and I use that word as a moral
judgment I'm realizing uh they ought you
hope that people are capable of go on
yeah well no I really do me not uh they
ought to be capable of saying oh I need
to stare out the window for a while I
need to go for a walk um I'm not feeling
creative right now and that they'll
create that space so my thing is when
you leave it all out on the field you
you're not worried about judging
yourself because you know look I I show
up every day and I play all not every
day we all have days where we're like I
was just lazy today but if you don't lie
to yourself and you know that way on
balance you really do play your guts out
um then when it's like you know I really
think what I need right now is to stop
down and just cuddle my wife for a day
it doesn't even I'm not saying like take
15 minutes people need to really think
about what do I need to do to optimize
myself whether and so if your job has
that element of creativity to it and you
need to stare out a window or go to the
beach or whatever 100% do it but you
need I if you want to achieve the
extraordinary you need to be able to
trust yourself to say I will do this
until I know I'm now avoiding something
else and it's no longer adding up to
something and because I have earned that
within myself when I need time off I
take time off MH I would say ideally
before you need it right I don't that I
might suck at yeah you you want to be
the person I mean I've I've done this
literally in a car more times than I'd
like to admit like waiting until it
tells you you can go zero miles before
you pull off to the gas station ideally
you're scheduling the quarter tank yeah
no how do you do that I think I usually
trying not to waste time and it wasn't
on my plan to stop for gas interesting
okay but I clearly need to rethink that
because I I I had it hit zero and the
gas station was not in sight and that
was a little terrifying have you few
month gas I've never I've never had a
this is the other problem every time it
hits zero like well I've never run out
before that must be lying to me there
must be a little bit more left in the
tank and I do not want to push that any
further but yeah I think obviously
humans aren't machines but the idea of
scheduling breaks at planned intervals I
think is really important so what would
you say what would you say to a
Beethoven who wants to take walks as
long as his workday um and who only
really seem to do three or four hours of
focused work a day like you don't get
greater at music than b to yeah I mean
that that would be my answer so the
thing I think everybody should judge
themselves by are the results and
results that are um set by you what what
are you looking for what is the metric
by which you're going to judge success
and so I think one of the things people
really struggle with is they don't have
Clarity they don't know what they want
and if you don't know what you want then
you're not going to be able to measure
whether you're getting there or not so
if somebody knows you're Beethoven
you're like this is how many symphonies
I want to write this month or this year
whatever and then did you do the things
that you needed to do in order to hit
that and now we should probably talk
what really is the punchline of life
which is I think at the highest level
it's how you feel about yourself when
you're by yourself so if you don't like
yourself all the money and success in
the world your life will still suck and
you will be racing towards suicide um so
I wouldn't do that so I would do things
that really earn your respect but you
have to be careful because you're going
to respect yourself based on your
beliefs and your values so be thoughtful
about what you build your beliefs and
values around you talk a lot about this
you need to anchor on something that's
real like you need to be lathering your
hard work and all that around something
you actually care about otherwise you're
going to be in trouble um but if he
loves his life back to Beethoven if he
loves his life and he's hitting his
goals I don't have any problem with that
I don't mind if somebody wants to stare
at a wall all day like I really don't
mind that I want to help people achieve
what they want to achieve I mind that a
little because I at least want that to
be to other people yeah lay out for me
what ought and I use that word in the
moral sense what ought people um strive
for well I I don't think it's my place
to determine that so I'm kind of with
you whatever your your values are I want
to try to figure out how you can align
your goals and your behaviors with those
values but you know I think we should
have a hierarchy of values I think you
know all else equal if you're if you're
doing something that's useful to other
people and makes their lives better I
feel much better about that than if it's
totally self- serving if you guys want
to make your financial goals a reality
you need to come up with a sound
strategy and begin investing I highly
recommend you check out facet facet
provides you with flexible access to cfp
professionals and a team of experts
across taxes benefits and more to help
you understand and expand your financial
opportunities instead of taking a
percentage of your portfolio facet has
an affordable flat fee membership and
when you make more you keep more for a
limited time facet will wave the $250
enrollment fee for new annual members
head to
fet.my
or sell Securities nor is it investment
legal or tax advice past performance is
not a guarantee of future performance
terms and conditions apply I think you
you just touched on something that that
I have a real issue with in Hustle
culture and it sounds like you do too
which is when people turn hard work into
a virtue they forget that hard work is
actually not in and of itself um a
morally worthy end it's a means Toe with
that really yeah okay wait so let's talk
about this reading your book I was like
oh yeah I'm a Puritan I am a child of
the Puritan I me Protestant Revolution
like you you've you've internalized the
Protestant work ethic 100% I I think I I
did too for for a long time and I still
subscribe to parts of it like I'm a give
Parts you hate about it yeah I mean well
look okay okay so I'm let me do the
double-edged sword I'm a beneficiary and
maybe also a victim of learned
industriousness the idea that you get
rewarded over and over again for effort
which is what Carol DW and other growth
mindset researchers have long encouraged
and then at some point effort itself
starts to take on secondary reward
properties and the feeling of hard work
itself is satisfying I have felt that
since at least I was a teenager maybe
even earlier and it's propelled a lot of
the the growth that I've achieved at the
same time sometimes I work hard at
something because uh you know I
internalize a goal of somebody else's
and then I realized this doesn't benefit
anyone and I don't enjoy it and so if
I'm not working hard on something that I
think is worthwhile why am I investing
my hard work there and that's the part I
would question do you object to that so
I've long thought of it in the following
way I'm always trying to figure out what
has Evolution optimize us for so
Evolution only has two levers Pleasure
and Pain and with those two very blunt
instruments it creates an
incredible diversity of behavior and I
have a feeling that the following
statement is evolutionarily accurate
though I don't have um hard science to
back this up but when I think
about fulfillment being the the closest
thing to the ideal state that I can
steer people towards and the reason I
steer people towards fulfillment instead
of happiness happiness is very transient
you can be happy and grieve at the same
time but you can be fulfilled and
grieving at the same time so that just
strikes me it's a positive State it's
far more resilient um so I started
thinking okay what is fulfillment what
is it born of I think it's the following
though if somebody has a better
definition I'm here for it um you must
work hard to gain a set of skills that
you care about for whatever intrinsic
reason that allow you to serve not not
only yourself but
others I think those are all
evolutionary levers that nature had to
incentivize so we're a social creature
so if you're just doing it for yourself
you won't feel right unless you're a
sociopath and if somebody came to me and
they were like I am profoundly depressed
I'd say go serve somebody like but
really go serve somebody and I think the
I barring a catastrophic like inability
to create serotonin or whatever I don't
think you can meaningfully serve others
and be depressed it's a it's a gut
instinct I have not run any tests but I
that seems pretty relevant and then the
work hard part to me
is evolution from an evolutionary
standpoint life was hyper dangerous and
very difficult and if you weren't
courageous and willing to work hard then
you were going to starve to death
effectively and so that feels like the
right cocktail of if you align yourself
with those things you'll just feel
better so interesting okay so I have I
have thoughts and questions um let's
let's start on the serving others um
question for a second so on the one hand
I'm I'm in agreement with you that um
actually empirically if you look at the
effect sizes on average um helping other
people is about as good for reducing
depression and anxiety as taking the
best known anti-depressants and
anti-anxiety medications on the market
I'm surprised not bigger um it might be
it's the I think part of the problem is
it's hard to quantify and compare so you
know how many hours of you know of
service or generosity do we equate to a
given dose GRS of an anti-depressant you
would know more about that than I would
but I don't I don't know how to do it
from a behavior perspective but um and
this is not to say by the way that I
think helping others is a substitute for
medication um or for therapy um it's
just to say it has a really powerful
effect the same way that we would tell
someone look the average effects of
exercise um are huge and you should not
Overlook those because that's a behavior
you can control I mean the other hand
there is um there is good evidence I'm
thinking about um helus and Fritz among
others uh to suggest that there's a
particular kind of service that can be
problematic from a depression and
anxiety standpoint which is basically
self-sacrifice um they call it
unmitigated communion and it's the idea
of I care a lot about helping other
people and I have zero concern for
myself and then I start to sacrifice
sleep um I don't work out uh I don't
spend time doing things that nourish me
I'm all about just responding to other
people's needs because I want to be
needed
and I've come to believe that actually
being needed could be a little unhealthy
that needed too much or needed full stop
um I think the I have a problem with the
idea of being needed that someone else
is fully dependent on me what I want to
be is valued as a father of three help
me reconcile that well look I I think
maybe there are exceptions to that I
think it's okay for kids to need their
parents but also you want to teach your
kids to be independent and to be
self-sufficient at some point or to rely
on others for specific things but not to
need one person for everything and so
I'd much rather be valued than needed in
general I guess I'm thinking about
friendships and can you give me when you
say value just the other person's like
wow I'm glad you're in my life I think
it's um I think about it a lot when
people ask for help um I need you to do
this versus I would really appreciate it
if you could do this um I want I want
anybody who's in a position to to seek
help to have multiple places to go um
and to not be solely relying on one
person and I think it's a great travesty
of modern society that a lot of people
people don't have access to
that very interesting uh I had not
thought about that before okay so that
makes sense to me I think it is a big
thing that people need to serve
themselves as well as others um that's
why I think it's really important that
whatever you're working hard at is
something that for whatever reason that
you don't need to justify to people
you're just into that thing um like I
have known for a very long time that the
way that I would contribute to others
was through storytelling it may not be
the most effective though I do think
it's pretty potent but the reality is
I'm not pursuing it because I think it's
the best I'm pursuing it because that's
my passion uh and so finding something
that you love being Unapologetic about
it but finding a way that you can
leverage that
to uh lift somebody else up make them
smile whatever I don't go play guitar
but have a sense of I play guitar as a
way to bring some joy to other people
and not just bu myself in my room again
not because I pass a moral judgment on
that I don't but because I think that
it's not in line with what evolution had
in mind and so you will end up feeling a
profound sense of disease and not know
why yeah so I I I think we're we're in
sync there I
think it's interesting I'm reminded of
there was an eie white quote that I
loved uh where he said uh I wake up in
the morning torn between a desire to
enjoy the world and improve the world
and this makes it very difficult to plan
the day it's pretty good it kind of does
but I think um the the research I've
read on this says that over time people
gravitate toward trying to align the two
and say I want to find things that I
enjoy that are also helpful to others
and I want to find ways of helping
others that I personally enjoy and but I
think whichever place you start that's
the only sustainable place to land that
makes sense so now talk to me about what
what does it take to really become
extraordinary you have a lot of examples
in the book not the least of which is
your own with diving and and how you got
better and better there uh but even
somebody like Steph Curry whose
documentary if I remember right is
called underrated yeah um and he's a
great example in the book what what is
that process well let's start with Steph
Curry because I think there's there's an
incredible scene in the documentary that
that came out after I turned in the book
it's like oh this is this is a this is a
missing scene um I I learned so much
from his trainer Brandon pain about how
they they structure practice uh to bring
out the best in Steph Curry and keep him
I think he's already the best shooter in
the history of basketball and he wants
to keep getting better MH so if you look
back at how he did that early on um
there's this scene you you saw the
documentary I haven't you haven't seen
it yet okay so I don't want to do a
spoiler on the whole thing but you kind
of already know where he ends up uh but
there's one scene in particular that I
cannot get out of my head which is uh
Steph Curry's in high school he's short
um he's he's not six feet yet no way
he's going to be tall enough to make the
NBA based on that growth trajectory I
think his probably the Assumption and
he's got a huge problem which is every
time he takes a shot and he's guarded by
somebody who is tall he gets blocked
because he's shooting from his hip and
it's a really slow developing shot um it
comes from low people can see it coming
and then just SWAT it down and sometimes
they don't even have to jump and he
watch this guy is going nowhere so he
talks to his dad um it helps to have a
dad who is an NBA player yeah when you
run into that that wall and his dad says
you've got to rebuild your shot if you
want to get to the next level if you
want to play in college you have to you
have to stop shooting from the hip and
start releasing higher um it's going to
be a faster release it's also going to
be harder to block um that's that's your
path and you watch Steph Curry literally
lose the ability to shoot he has to
start over and go back to the drawing
board and I think a lot of people are
unwilling to do that because he was a
really good shooter shooting from his
hip and the idea of going backward and
saying I've got to give up the gains
I've already made and start over from
scratch that too much to lose I don't
want to do it but Steph Curry is
passionately committed to getting better
and he wants to play in college so he
literally goes through months of just
brick after brick after brick so what do
I take from that I take from from that a
couple things one sometimes you have to
reverse to go forward um a step back can
lead to two steps forward if you find a
better method and that's exactly what
he's doing two you have to then be
willing to to embrace the discomfort of
saying this is going to feel like crap
and three you have have to be willing to
tolerate imperfection and say I'm going
to make a lot of mistakes I'm going to
get worse on the path to getting better
um and that to me is a bunch of
character skills that we don't teach
enough uh but we ought
to okay but I'm going to guess that
there is a lot more than just a
willingness to go backwards what do we
in terms of um drilling repetition
ability to push through borom like where
where what breaks most people because
I've said many times boredom kills more
dreams than failure ever will um from an
entrepreneurship standpoint yeah I see
that all the time in terms of people
that I work with in terms of
entrepreneurs that come to me seeking
help I'm just like the number of days
that you're going to spend doing things
that you absolutely do not want to do
but they just have to get done in order
to get to the next level it's like you
can avoid it a little bit more maybe if
you're um you know just working for
somebody else because you can uh what
they call it quiet quitting you can back
off it in phone it in pick your
generation but if you're going to be the
one responsible for everybody's paycheck
all of a sudden you just have to do it
yeah um it's an idea that you touch on
in the book yeah what's what's the deal
okay so long before burnout what you're
talking about is the problem that
psychologists call bore out which I was
delighted to find it's an actual term
literally you're bored out of your mind
and I think that comes from the way that
most people think about deliberate
practice
which is I've got to like I've got to
just push my through myself through I've
got to I've got to push as hard as I can
through this slog um it's monotonous
it's repetitive but I know I need to do
it um and the problem is like bore out
is sort of the opposite of burnout in
that it's under stimulation and
chronically that actually is a source of
burnout and that's your point about how
boredom kills more dreams than than
failure does because um repeated
experiences of Bor Bor out just at some
point you're like I I cannot I can't
find the will to do this I just don't
want to do it anymore I'm exhausted so
um Steph Curry's trainer Brandon Payne
has a really interesting solution to
this uh he uh he does what I would call
um drawing from his whole body of work
in sports psychology deliberate play as
opposed to deliberate practice and it's
the idea that I want to take the the
specific skill I want to build and I
want to I don't want to gamify it in the
sense that we're going to create a
leaderboard um or a bunch of bells and
whistles to trick you into liking the
thing you
I actually want to re-engineer the very
process of skill building so it's fun so
for Steph an example of one of the games
Brandon created is called 21 he's got a
minute and a half to score 21 points
from anywhere on the court and the shots
are deliberately calibrated so that his
best shot of making the 21 is to shoot
from places that he's not that accurate
and also he's got to move really fast
and get out of breath so that he's
simulating what he would do in a real
game and guess what that score he has a
person best which is okay how fast can I
do 21 and then instead of having to to
compete against other people he's
actually trying to compete against his
best uh excuse me instead of having to
to try to compete against other people
he's basically trying to raise the bar
for his future self um and defeat his
past self and I think that kind of
deliberate play is a great solution to
bore out because you're taking the Daily
Grind and you're actually turning it
into a source of daily Joy it is a fun
challenge for Steph Curry to say okay
can I get 21 in a minute today
how do you want people to apply this in
their normal life like does all this
stuff apply to uh a career does this
only apply if you're in sports like how
do you how do you apply this if you're
not the entrepreneur you're in the
accounting department at a big company
well let me let me actually give you my
personal example because after writing
this chapter I was like yeah I should
probably practice what I was teaching
there and see if I can put this into
action so I was thinking about the most
boring parts of my job and the thing I
hate most as an author is editing M just
bores the hell out of me like I already
I figured out the idea the AHA the
Insight is there I've covered the
evidence I found a story to bring it to
life and now I'm just tinkering it's
like you know I'm on the one yard line
and I've already marched all the way
down the field the last yard takes so
much effort to try to refine it and it
doesn't feel to me like I'm learning
anything or contributing anything but I
know it matters for the reader
experience and it's the that I
procrastinate on Mo most I will start
the next chapter instead of editing the
last one uh I'll put it away for weeks
because I just don't get energized by it
and then I wrote this chapter about
deliberate play and said I've got to
turn this into deliberate play how do I
do that all right let me um Let Me Take
A I've got specific things I'm trying to
improve in my editing so one thing that
I I've struggled with for a long time is
um is concreteness and imagery um I'm an
abstract thinker I'm very cognitive um I
start with the data and I need to I need
to have lots of vivid stories so that
people can who are much more I guess
more narrative oriented than I am for
for you for example you love stories
right I need to have a story in there
that you can relate to and say ah okay
that makes the evidence stick so I'm
trying to rewrite a paragraph I'm trying
to turn a study into a
story like why don't why don't I try to
write this in the voice of Maya Angelou
and that's my game can I take a
paragraph and rewrite it as Maya
would write it always my Angelou no so
that was the first thought and then I
thought okay I went to poetry because
poets are great at imagery L me also go
to some of my favorite fiction authors
how would John Green write this story
how would JK Rowling do it how would
Maggie Smith do it and that becomes a
little experiment where every day I've
got a different author I'm working on
and I'm trying to write a little bit in
their voice and now we have Claude and
chat GPT and I can actually compare what
I came up with to what the generative AI
tool produced and learned something in
the process editing is fun now no I I
don't want to say it's fun it's kind of
fun and I almost like it that's really
interesting so how did how did you come
up with that game how do people figure
out what their way of making something
play is it's a really good question so
for me it started with I was actually
reading um I was reading harlon coin uh
who's just great at page Turners and I
was like wow okay like how would how how
would harlon cin do this and then I
realized it wasn't enough of a stretch
for me because Harland builds a lot of
psychology into his books and so I went
to Maya Angelou as a more extreme option
um how would I do that if I if I were in
a different area I think where I would
start is I would say let's look at well
let's let's take a jot what's a task you
hate Tom that you find boring oh God
anything to do Finance okay what bores
you about Finance in particular um there
is something weird about the way my
brain processes numbers I can feel
myself it's like running a marathon in
quicksand
and so all of the sudden when I I go
from like what we're doing now I feel
sharp I feel alert I can put ideas
together very quickly uh but once it
gets to math I can do it and I at times
feel like I think about the numbers in a
more useful way than many of my
peers however I do it so
slowly that I'm just like this is really
unbearable it it I cognitively feel
recognizable to myself it's very weird
and so that makes it because it's so
inefficient it just makes it a real SLO
and there's no story there's no emotion
to it it's all just like where do we
have to cut where do we add oh God okay
and so what's what's the like what are
you trying to do with numbers that
involves learning or skill building so
uh that involves learning or skill
building that I'm not sure yet I don't
know how to answer that question but I
will say trying what I'm trying to get
to is okay how do we capital allate um
knowing what my goals are where do I
allocate the resources in order to get
to that next level or what story is the
data telling that gets a little more fun
in terms of trying to actually analyze
but as you like really dig in you start
trying to cross check to make sure I'm
not telling a fake story that this is
the real story that the data is telling
um that just gets really tedious okay so
a few places I would start one option
would be to pick something you already
enjoy and try to graft it on this
process so could you write a comic book
about your Capital allocation it's
really interesting um I don't know I'd
have to think about that the way I have
done it historically is I will reward
myself so like okay this is your
objective you need to get this done by
this time and if you get that done by
that time then I get to move on to the
things that I find fun so uh I will
often do if I have art to review which I
love uh I'll say okay I see that I've
got art to review but I also have
Finance to do I'm GNA do the finance
first and if I finish it you know by
whatever time then I can go do the art
stuff um but I've never thought about
how to turn that into a game I I mean I
think timer is interesting it's an
experience definitely an experiment to
run yeah so you could do a timer and
accelerate the reward if you finish a
little faster without making mistakes
yeah even just doing something where I'm
beating my personal best so this goes
into okay we're we build video games
here to impact Theory which not many
people know yet so we think a lot about
gamification and you talk in the book
about you don't want shallow play you
want deep play is it deep play is that
what you call it uh Dan coil called it
deep fun which I love I love the term
for instead of shallow fun with that in
mind so how do you go from the shallow
gamification of just like get better
time get you know experience points or
whatever in a video game to something
that's deep fun cuz this really applies
to me on multiple levels one it'll help
me better orchestrate a game of things
that I find boring but it will also help
me make better video games maybe we'll
find out uh I think the difference
between shallow and deep fun is about
purpose uh it's it's about saying hey
I'm GNA find a way to enjoy the process
of um of working toward a goal that
really matters that I believe in so um
how many people are working at video
games right now uh the team fluctuates
but call
it 15 fulltime okay so what I would do
is I would take those 15 people and say
let's start with um let's do a
brainwriting exercise where we're going
to um we're going to each jot down 20
ideas for how we're going to take the
financing part of building a video game
company um and make it more fun we're
going to collect everybody's ideas uh
we're all going to rate them
independently and then we're going to
just pilot the five best ideas and then
you've got a little bit of deep fun in
the process of trying to get everybody's
independent creative problem solving
skills focused on this problem and then
ideally they've also come up with some
things that would be fun to try you do a
lot of Consulting in business right uh I
do more Consulting than I intend to but
I've given up on formal Consulting and
made it advising like I'm I'm happy to
to tell you here's what I've seen in the
randomized controlled experiments and
the longitudal studies I'm happy to give
you examples from other organizations
I've worked with um I will not tell you
how to implement it because your company
is best run by you and I can hold up a
mirror and kind of reflect some problems
to you and generate some solutions you
might not have thought of but you need
to have ownership over whether you're
going to take those seriously or not
right I asked because I'm curious who
has
gamified the workload the most
interestingly so I don't know if this
counts as gamified but I'm definitely
going to say it's a version of deep deep
fun and it's probably a variation on
something we were talking about earlier
which is job crafting so have you ever
been to Morning Star the tomato paste
plant in Northern California believe it
or not I've never even heard of them
okay good so one of the most interesting
organizations I've ever visited so I
went there five or six years ago to do a
podcast episode because I I found out
that they make hundreds of millions of
dollars a year uh they've never had a
single boss since the 1980s and I was
like this is we've all heard about hocy
in the tech World they started it much
earlier and they found a way to make it
effective in manufacturing I just I want
to see that I want to understand yeah
and they do a lot of unusual things that
may not be good fit for anybody's
company but they do have some processes
that I thought were really compelling so
one thing they do is when you join
Morning Star on day one uh they don't
know how to assign you a job because you
don't report to anyone and eventually
they realize what we should do is just
give you the job of your predecessor and
you do that for the first year at the
end of year one then you get to rewrite
your own job description how fun is that
you get to figure out what you enjoy
doing what you think is Meaningful and
that's now your new job but they put
guard rails around it I was going to say
like uh yeah they have a couple of them
one guardrail is you have to write up an
explanation of how what you want to do
is going to better Advance the mission
than the prior version of your job so
you've got to you've got to make a case
that this is going to generate
Collective value number two you then
have to go to the five to 10 people
you're most interdependent with and get
their Buy in and convince them that this
is a better version of your job
and if you do that you have created a
more fun more meaningful version of your
job a committee that has to approve it
uh it's it's basically it's a they call
a colleague letter of understanding and
so there's a a group of your colleagues
who have to give you the thumbs
up wow okay this is super weird and this
really starts to lean into um the future
of
work okay
so without you having to endorse this is
like the thing everybody should do I
it's an experiment I want to
understand why and how so what made them
embark on that Journey back in the 80s I
think they they realized at some point
that they wanted to build a company on
self-management so they were they were
into the idea that people should have
more autonomy at work than they do uh
and they hated the idea that there would
be like office space style eight bosses
breathing down your neck micromanaging
you and they said what if we treat
people like adults uh what if we not
only recruit but develop on intrinsic
motivation and encourage people to
really think about how what they care
about and enjoy aligns with what's good
for the company and then they said at
some point you should be an active
architect of your own job um and we're
not going to start over from scratch in
most cases we're going to have you
Tinker with your existing job to try to
make it better but if you want to make a
radical change and you think there's a
better way for you to contribute to the
company we want to know that uh because
a lot of people are you know are sort of
selected into a job that just was not
made for them at all um and I thought
that was cool I don't think that it has
to be that extreme so let let's now pull
back and and bring this into like how
does a a slightly more traditional
workplace do this so WL Gore have you
spend any time with them no so they they
made gortex you probably know them for
their gloves and and winter gear uh they
have instead of a a ladder hierarchy
they built a lce system and the simple
idea eor is um normally in companies
good ideas die when one person up the
ladder above you rejects them and they
said what if we did the opposite What If
instead of one no killing an idea we
allowed one yes to give life to an idea
so the idea in alatus is you can go to
multiple people at different levels of
the hierarchy and pit your idea or your
project and all you need is one of them
to give it the green light in order to
begin working on it and that means you
could spend 10 or 20% of your time on
something that's very deep fun for you
that might generate value for others I I
loved one example they had where um a
guy um basically said hey like the the
the some of the gortex material that we
have that repels grit on bike cables um
I wonder if that could keep the grit off
my guitar strings
and he starts prototyping it he brings
in this guy um John Spencer and John uh
John finds a sponsor for it in the
company he finds one senior executive
who says yeah sounds interesting and
three years later they have one of the
most successful g guitar strings on the
market and I think it it keeps the
strings clean dramatically longer than
the existing options they like that was
somebody's idea they dreamed up they
thought it would be fun to work on they
then realized this could be really
valuable to the organization and they
had to find one person who could approve
the investment in it and that's all they
needed I don't know why more companies
don't run that experiment can I tell you
yeah tell me uh that sounds like a
suicide run so uh as you were talking
about it I was like okay hold on the
these are companies with just
ridiculously high profit margins that I
don't know how long they've been in
business but if the Tomato company's
been around since the 80s I get it like
there is a point at which it becomes
hyper predictable um but I mean they've
survived recessions because my my
immediate reaction is at least in a
small company where you're fighting for
every dollar there's hyper variability
like we make a lot of our Revenue off of
YouTube and that means I'm in a knife
fight with the algorithm which people
are it's you know share of eyeball time
there's only so many things that people
can watch and YouTube could not care
less whether it's me or somebody else
they just want to keep you on the
platform I mean they'll care to a
certain extent because we do high brow
content if you guys will give me that
our CPM speak for themselves we get
[__] high cpms I'm going to be
Unapologetic Unapologetic about it um so
and that they might lean towards us a
little bit but like if we take our eye
off the ball for half a second somebody
else is going to come in in the space
they're going to take some percentage of
our share away they're just new people
entering the space every day and so the
the thought of being able to look away
and expect it to be the same when we
come back just non-existent now I am a
big believer in I I don't scale so me
micromanaging people is even worse than
just like walking
away but it seems that what you need and
the reason that more companies don't do
that is you need to know exactly where
you're trying to get to you need to
communicate how we're going to get there
you need to leave room for better ideas
because I I operate on what R alio calls
the dot collector so you want people to
be able to give feedback to anybody
anytime so if somebody thinks my
strategy is dumb I would want them to
give feedback that the whole company can
see by the way I tell people to give
give me feedback aggressively and in
public and I do that because I want to
set the standard I don't want people
getting weird about somebody saying they
don't like their idea or whatever um but
man like the the odds
I don't want to make a blanket statement
because I will do whatever works but
with my experience the odds of people
pulling in opposite directions border on
100% And so that's a risk I agree with
that I don't see how they keep laser
focus okay so U I think you you may be
right Gore may be able to get away with
that because they have some very
well-defined Market niches and they're
successful and they have slack capacity
um maybe maybe a better example of how
you would take this into a a more
traditional company is um Innovation
tournaments so great example um Dow
Chemical years ago says we're looking
for ideas that will save energy and
reduce waste and we'll let anybody in
the company submit proposals they have
to cost uh no more than 200 Grand us and
they have to be at least have the
potential to pay for themselves within a
year and you have that very focused call
for this is what we want you then have
peers and subject matter experts
evaluating the proposals promising ones
might be a paragraph at first then they
get Advanced around two you write a
couple Pages maybe you get paired up
with somebody who had a similar idea
eventually they bet on the the highest
rated
ideas they do this for a decade they
invest in 575 ideas on average they save
the company $110 million per year whoa
most of these ideas Tom do not come from
people in creative jobs they're you know
somebody's on a factory floor they saw a
process that was broken they had an idea
for how to fix it they didn't know where
to take the idea until the Innovation
tournament was announced what I really
like about the tournament is you have a
a filtering and selection process to say
we're not going to bet on all the ideas
we're going to take the most promising
ones uh that we think are smart
experiments to run and we're going to
you know we're going to expect just like
a venture capitalist does that if we bet
on dozens of ideas that those are going
to produce net value if they were highly
rated inside the company could you see
do doing something like that yes that
one is that's I love that that's
fantastic uh have you paid attention to
what Elon mus does in Tesla with the
production line tell me more I wish I'd
studied this more closely so I'm going
to give you my memory of this it could
be a little bit off but my understanding
is anybody can stop the production line
at any time and anyone can experiment on
a better way to do something and there
was one story they told I forget what
the guy was like trying to simplify the
way that windshield wipers were cut it
wasn't that but it's something like that
and so he ends up stopping the line and
uh somebody came over like what the hell
are you doing because there was like
this pile of uh rejected blades from his
test or whatever it wasn't blades again
but you get the idea and I the guy was
like oh no Elon wants us to do this like
if we think that we have a way that we
can improve something by whatever metric
then we're able to stop it and
experiment and it probably isn't you can
just stop down the line and take it over
but it's like something that has spare
capacity or whatever like you can go um
work on it and I just thought ooh that
is really smart because you want like
one thing I'm always telling my team
because companies companies go through
phases you start in what I call the
Hustler phase in the Hustler phase
everybody's doing everything um I'm
hyper involved I'm having to create the
momentum I've only got generalists I
don't have anybody specializing in
anything we just have to wear too many
hats uh you can really make a mistake
staying in the Hustler face too long you
want to get to Professional Management
as quickly as you can where people begin
to specialize that there's very formal
things that you're trying to do and
accomplish and all that but as I
mentioned earlier I don't scale no no
CEO scales so you very quickly have to
be in a position where in the beginning
it was like yeah just ask me and I'll
give you the answer we're all sitting in
one room yep do that do that do that and
then you get to the point where it's
like I won't answer that question
anymore you have to know how to solve
this problem and if you can't solve this
problem and maybe it won't be as
efficiently as as me CU you know my
experience whatever but if you can't
solve that problem I'm going to replace
you with somebody that can
and back to Elon he said you're paid in
direct proportion to the difficulty of
the problem you solve and I think that's
exactly right and so you need people
that can think for themselves which
means that you have to like you cannot
turn people into automata and one of the
mistakes that managers make is they
think their value is in being needed
going back to your thing about being
needed they think their value is in
being needed your value is not in being
needed your value is in helping those
people shine and if a
manager says to themselves I can't do
anything all I can do is make sure the
right people are on the right task I
have the right team with the right
motivation and Clarity then interesting
things
happen vanta automates up to 90% of
compliance work for Frameworks including
sock 2 ISO 270001 and hippoc compliance
getting you audit ready in weeks instead
of months and saving you up to 85% of
associated costs with over Integrations
you can easily Monitor and secure the
tools your business relies on and vant
scales with your business helping you
successfully enter new markets land
bigger deals and earn customer trust so
join the 6,000 plus fast growing
companies already using vanta to improve
and prove their security so they can win
more deals shorten sales cycles and
deepen relationships for a limited time
vanta is offering impact Theory
listeners a free free trial when you
sign up at
v.com
impact so interesting I I I think you're
you're articulating a few things that um
that I guess my world of organizational
psychology has has tried to codify so um
I think first of all there's a great set
of studies by Toby Wallen colleagues
that looked at what happens when you
brought in advanced manufacturing
technology um to you know much more
traditional um machines and so people
are are more or less learning to work
with robots for the first time and as
part of that they end up getting
additional autonomy and it's a test to
try to figure out what like is this
autonomy good do they use it effectively
or not and it turns out when you give
people autonomy um the machines end up
um getting um they have lower downtime
basically because people have they
they've felt like okay it's my
responsibility now to make sure that the
robot can work and so if the machine
goes down I'm going to learn the skills
to fix it and that's good right you want
you want people to be able to take that
initiative the other thing that happens
though is that you have fewer faults in
the first place because once people
started fixing the machines and they
felt like it was something they had
ownership over they learned what was
causing the problems and they were able
to prevent them in the first place and
so I I think you're making a compelling
case that has some good data behind it
suggesting yeah we want to we want to
let people take that initiative I will
say uh Elon Musk would be the first
person to tell you you should be
hesitant to take management advice from
Elon Musk I think we should all be
cautious about that we don't know how
much of his success is because of his
strategies versus in some cases in spite
of his strategies let's map that out so
I will take the very um I
was I was I'll be I'll dial back the
controversy here I was very uh impressed
with how he moved when he came into X
formerly Twitter uh I think some people
are going to hate that statement where
does Adam Grant fall on that
statement I I I was not excited about a
bunch of the choices he made um tell me
which ones and why you didn't like them
I mean first of all downsizing the
empirical evidence is it could not be
more negative on a strategy for
organizational change there was one
paper actually published in a top
management Journal calling downsizing
quote Dumb and Dumber and when academics
use that kind of language the the data
have to be pretty uh pretty airtight um
so in those studies you look at what
were what were they judging it against
because yeah looking at as an
entrepreneur I'm like you just bought a
company that's rapidly going out of
business and if and look I'm I'm taking
him at his word in terms of how much
Capital they were burning but there is
no option other than to downsize when
you're burning the kind of capital they
were burning well maybe right I think
that's the open question so if you look
at the downsizing research you I think
in the the study I'm thinking of um want
to say or data Guthrie among others
they're you're looking at about 5,000
companies um you match them with with
controls that have similarly dire
Financial Straits and then you look at
what happens to the companies that
downsize versus the ones that took other
steps like executive pay cuts for
example um and it turns out that the
companies that downsize do consistently
worse so what goes wrong when you
downsize number one you eliminate people
whose jobs were indispensable and you
didn't know it until you lost them and
we've seen versions of that at at X um
especially when the platform became
unstable two um you end up seeing that
your most talented people are the most
likely to leave because they have the
most options elsewhere they see the
writing on the wall like this ship is
sinking I don't want to be on it and
three of the talented people who stay
you also run into the problem of
Survivor guilt where they they start to
feel really terrible that you know
equally competent people have their jobs
lost um they start to focus really
narrowly on what they need to do to keep
their jobs as opposed to broadly on
innovating to improve the company and it
seems to be a net losing proposition I'm
not going to say never downsize but I
think it's it's really rash to come in
and think this is going to be your your
magic bullet to try to fix
Twitter okay so I I that's my first beef
I love it so we won't know whether what
he's doing makes any sense for let's say
another year uh but I'll happily play
back this clip if I end up just being
woefully wrong I'm happy to be wrong too
right cuz the interesting thing about my
job is I can tell you what works on
average for most of the people most of
the time in a situation like this and
say downsizing is not a strategy that I
would bet on right but there may be
cases where it's effective there may be
cases where to your point it's just
totally necessary um but I think there
were Alternatives and I would have loved
to see those like run the ab test let's
let's experiment with some other options
before you cut people's jobs all right
so here's why I was very excited
watching him come in and do his thing
um one I want to be very clear it bums
me out when people lose their job I'm
I'm not indifferent to that it when when
you have run companies for as long as I
have when I say you take it very
personally that people have a job that
they can count on you that their
families are able to count on that job I
can't say that Elon cares maybe he
doesn't I'm just saying I'm about to
give you my take on this and so I want
to be very clear that that is not lost
to me and I'm mortified every time I
have to let somebody go even when it's
for cause I hate it but
nonetheless you have a business there
are only two options when you are losing
money option number one make more money
option number two spend less money
that's it there's no magical third
option so making more money is always
the right answer if you can do it the
bad news is it takes a lot of time and
there are huge question marks and so you
might have an idea and you think okay
this is really going to work but if it
doesn't you're in trouble cutting costs
on the other hand has instant impact now
he took the company public or sorry
private so there's one thing I'm about
to say that he didn't have to worry
about but just as a general rule because
we're recording this right after Disney
made their announcements of massive
budget cuts um and their stock price
soared the reason they're stock price
sworded is because people that own the
stock understand you can't operate at a
loss like that like you've got to do
something and so if I'm if I have
tracked it closely and maybe I've missed
some of it with Disney but they um cut
number one was staff and then a future
cut that they plan to do is basically
doing less content and so not all Cuts
have to be at at the employees expense
100% I'm all for executive compensation
reduction if they're not delivering
results [__] slash and burn baby
myself included first of all as the
owner of my companies I'm paid last not
second to last last [__] I have
not made a single dime off of impact
Theory I have Just sh
all the profits back into the company
I've shoveled my own money into the
company so my money is very much where
my mouth is now Elon comes in realizes
okay we're in Dire Straits here he's
super controversial by this point so
advertisers are fing the platform like
crazy because they think he's a
right-wing nut job so he's thinking to
himself if he's smart I'm going to try
to make more money off of my antibot
thing with the subscriptions but I don't
know if people are going to go for that
so I I I'm going to do it but I can't
count on it uh
the
mentality as perceived by myself as an
outsider I have no idea I could be
totally wrong but from the outside
looking at the rate of new features that
they added was so ridiculously slow and
when I watch him look admittedly as
somebody who again I've built companies
for people that are hearing my voice for
the first time I built and sold a
billion doll company I know what it's
like to build
companies that [__] is hard what he does
is crazy he might be a lunatic I might
hate him if I ever met him not not
standing up for who he is as a person
I'm just saying the results he has
gotten from a business perspective are
unparalleled in this generation like
this guy is unreal what he's doing is
just it it's Peerless right now I'm not
saying in history but rare rare rare is
the entrepreneur like Elon Musk so
anyway I see him come in and he's like I
we have a culture document Adam Graham
that again maybe you would love but
maybe not I think you would respond to
it whether you think it's wise of me to
do is a totally different question but
it says we are looking for and I quote
hardcore
[__] and that was the bat
signal that he threw into the sky and so
I agree with you that I'm sure a lot of
people fled but he'll attract a
completely different kind of person
who's like I want to be in an
organization that we're hardcore like
we're going to do something
unprecedented we're going to build the
everything app like we're going to go
ham and because I like that energy so
much and I try to bring that energy to
my company uh now ah you'd have to ask
my staff and I'm not around to find out
if this is really true I don't think I'm
an [__] I'm not everybody's flavor I
liken myself to Black licorish if you
like me you like me does anyone like
black licorice I love black licorice
more than you can imagine wow I can't
even imagine this is my bad signal to
all the people that like black licorice
uh so look we are not the right company
for everybody nor is I'm sure X or any
other company that Elon mus touches but
seeing somebody come in and say I want
hardcore people uh I don't come back if
you're not willing to work long hard and
smart that energy to me is intoxicating
it's exciting and because I love it I
want it to work if it doesn't I'll
acknowledge it I will accept it I only
care about what actually works but that
was incredibly exciting now again if
they can be believed they will be
hitting profitability in the not too
distant future which when he took it
over they were losing like $40 million a
month or something just insane so I
don't disagree with most of what you
said I think where where I struggle a
little bit is I think Elon had a
competitive advantage in in electric
cars and in rockets that he does not
have in social media which is if you
want to be an aerospace engineer SpaceX
is the job of choice um they're far
ahead of their competition um if you
want to work on electric cars Tesla is
still this it's the place to
be nobody's looking around no software
engineer is like my dream company is
Twitter like I think that company is
going to change the world and I like
that is a literal rocket ship and I want
to be part of it and so I think he has
much more compet I think it's way harder
to do that in Social I also think that
the you know the specific Vision he
brought to the table was not compelling
to people in the same way as I want to
create um an escape hatch you know for
like I want to colonize space I want to
get people to Mars like we need a hard
drive back up for Humanity or like I
want to fight climate change and we need
a different source of you know of of
power for cars you weren't rallied by
free speech um not everybody is I get it
no because I mean everybody's seen the
the xkcd cartoon right that says like
Freedom it's it's I'm not going to do it
justice here but let's call it up you
let's BR it up let's do it right now X
kcd all letters here we go this is
it oh God it's too small zoom
in go for it Tom you can do the honors
uh Public Service Announcement this
stick figures so there's a stick figure
saying Public Service Announcement the
right to free speech means the Govern
govern can't arrest you for what you say
it doesn't mean that anyone else has to
listen to your [__] or host you
while you share it the first amendment
doesn't Shield you from criticism or
Consequences if you're yelled at
boycotted have your Show cancelled or
get Bann from an internet Community your
free speech rights aren't being violated
it's just that the people listening
think you're an [__] and they're
showing you the door okay so uh yeah I
don't have a beef with that what I will
I will say dear society as a public
service announcement you'll shoot your
Society in the [__] face with that
attitude but nonetheless it's true if
people want to vote against you they
absolutely should be able to
however in when people on one side of
the political Spectrum are
being not banned but shadowbanned silent
censored at whatever 10x the rate uh
that gets worrisome like I legit
worried I I haven't researched the
Twitter files but certainly that is the
the word coming out of the pr machine
now if that's total [__] fine fair
enough but it I will admit that's how it
felt yeah and I I think a lot of people
felt that way and what I want to know is
is that sentiment or is that something
that can be backed up by the data and
one um I will say and I I comment this
you know really wanting to to follow
wherever the data go and I'm I'm 100%
open to being wrong and changing my mind
on this um one I I've read one body of
research on social media suggesting that
okay yes conservatives were canceled at
a slightly higher rate than liberals um
or at least Shadow ban or whatever
whatever you want to talk about it their
their their post did not take off to the
same degree they also spread
misinformation at higher rates than
liberals did and so like this is
actually interestingly a conservative
critique of liberals that you could flip
and say and by the way I I would not
identify as a liberal like I don't
believe in political parties to begin
with which is a whole another
conversation um I don't think your
belief should ever line up with a group
of people on multiple issues you're not
thinking for yourself facts at that
point um and you're definitely not doing
critical thinking uh if you just you
know parrot the the positions of your
party but anyway that's another
conversation I think the you know so
often on um like I I think conservatives
rightly critique um you know data on um
on opportunity and all kinds of domains
by saying like we don't want equality of
outcomes we want equality of opportunity
and if different groups have different
outcomes we don't know whether that's
because they were not as you know as
good or because they were disadvantage
um so let's go to the opportunity thing
I would say the same thing here just
because one group um is you know is sort
of uh I don't even want to say banned um
is deboosted or de Amplified at a
greater rate than others doesn't mean
they didn't deserve it um and if you're
spreading rampant misinformation or
disinformation um and that can be
independently and responsibly checked um
I think Elon said and I this was one of
my favorite things he did when he bought
Twitter he said I want us to become the
most reliable source of information on
Earth well then you have to have metrics
for gauging reliability um and I think
Community notes was an effort at that I
think tweeting conspiracy theories is
not helpful to that mission in any way
shape or form okay let's talk about
Community notes because we that'll be
the platform on which we will agree so I
am sure that it has its flaws and its
problems and all that but I don't see a
better way other than if the wisdom of
the crowd is calling out saying hey this
is a problem and he's talked about how
the algorithm of community notes works
it's like people that typically disagree
need to agree on the note for it to
become a note I was like oo that's Saucy
so look I haven't looked super closely
at it but that feels like the right
answer if you can come up with the right
algorithm for hey people that normally
disagree actually agree on this thing
the odds then of this being believable
are pretty high I'll take for now that
it isn't being hacked right because of
course I'm sure there are ways to gamify
that yeah and what you're talking about
is called a bridging algorithm right
which you we we need more of to identify
the overlapping points of view between
people who normally are on very
different um ends of a spectrum I think
the other thing we need to do though is
we ought to be looking at look at
Wikipedia Wikipedia Wikipedia that
deleted me yes the Wikipedia that delet
imagine I don't exactly have a lot of
faith in Wikipedia I mean I I don't know
what happened there all I know is
empirically um Wikipedia put
encyclopedia out of business because
they created a process for people to
gain credibility it's it's a little bit
like what Ray does at Bridgewater um
we're going to build a believability
score based on your track record of of
being right in the past in a domain
right which is very domain specific you
could do that um we could have a series
of edits that go back and forth and then
there's a group of independent Arbiters
who then try to take a look at the
sources and and resolve it is remarkable
I mean if you if you pitched Wikipedia
today and people didn't know it existed
and you called it something else people
would tell you you're mad there's no way
you could get the internet to agree on
anything my read of the evidence is on
average it's surprisingly accurate and
so there's something that's working more
often than it's not why aren't we
studying that why aren't we you know
incorporating that potentially into a
platform that we bought would be my
question interesting so what is it
what's the difference not the difference
why is community notes worse than
Wikipedia I don't know if it is I just
haven't seen the data cuz that to me
feels like it's a similarish approach I
don't know how the algorithm works on
Wikipedia so I can't say but going back
to um the well actually can I throw out
one thing that I think would be relevant
here I think that where we ran into a
lot of a lot of trouble over the past
few years is people posting information
that has health or safety consequences
um with huge followings that goes viral
before it's fact checked and so I think
that in an Ideal World um Community
notes would have a filter fact checking
we can we can have independent fact
Checkers we can have experts with
different political Persuasions um
because not all crowds are equally wise
like this is the the fundamental lesson
of wisdom of crowds research is some
Crowds Are Much More insightful than
others and we want to figure out like we
we want to you can do this for example
in forecasting um Phil tlock and his
colleagues have some remarkable data is
showing that some people are better at
predicting future events than others and
it's domain agnostic in other words we
can ask them what's going to happen to
the price of Bitcoin in six months we
can ask them who's going to win um the
Olympic gold and gymnastics uh in 2024
we can ask them who's going to win an
election in a given country and there
are certain people who will outperform
um most of the world on each of those
questions because they are better at
overcoming confirmation bias they're
better at recognizing their assumptions
and then pressure testing those
assumptions and rethinking their
convictions if they get initial signal
they might be wrong that's a skill set
guess what I want those people making
our forecast I want those people
weighing in um as part of the crowd
that's going to judge I don't think we
should run Community notes like a
democracy where everyone has an equal
vote I think that some opinions are more
credible than others don't you yeah no I
agree with that wholeheartedly um I just
want to make sure that that's as broad
of a SWAT like for instance if there's
nine people that have that predictive
ability I'm not for it anymore it's just
way too easy for nine people to either
collude get by whatever have an angle uh
that would be a huge problem and it's a
problem if they have a shared
affiliation so if it's a bunch of
liberals who share that skill well
there's something wrong with the way
that we're measuring predictive accuracy
um and we also need to do a better job
democratizing the knowledge so that
people can improve their skills yeah so
when it's when it is a broads set that
there's some criteria in this case
algorithmically just to keep it simple
that these are people that traditionally
disagree but they agree on this thing
when there's some set of rules like that
I can get behind it when it's a broad
set of people so my my very aggressive
bias is that when something becomes top
down that is when things lead to just
nightmare scenarios and longtime
listeners in my show will be sick of
hearing me say this but for newbies uh I
will say this there is a trifect of
books you need read and at the end of
those I seriously doubt you will ever
want top- down control that is Mao the
untold story The goog archipelago by
Alex Ander Soulja niten and um the rise
and fall of the Third Reich if you read
those if you want a fourth for spice
read the red famine and all of a sudden
you're going to be like [__] that I do
not want anything top down it can just
when it deranges it deranges so hard
that millions in some cases tens of
millions in other cases over a hundred
million people end up dead and that that
scares me so much and S I just assume
I'm one of the bad guys that that I
wouldn't see it that I would break bad
and not realize it scary and so I don't
want the power I don't want other people
to have the power like I want this as
Diversified as possible which brings me
to the other point that I will make and
can I jump in before you shift gear so
as a psychologist what I would add to
that analysis um I think it's it's
terrifying the one of the things that
scares me most about the concentration
of power is that the wrong people are
attracted to it so if you think about um
what's like psychologist have called the
dark Triad of Personality yes
melanism psychopathy and narcissism uh
guess what people who have those traits
are more likely to want power and in a
lot of cases we're more likely to give
it to them because we mistake their
confidence for competence and then like
people see them at some point they're
like oh no power corrupted maybe maybe
sometimes maybe for some people but
there's also a case to be made um
empirically that power reveals that like
these people are really good at hiding
uh their self-serving agendas until they
have free reign and then at that point
they let all hell break loose and I
think that's the fact that that's a
dynamic in Social systems um is
completely terrifying and I think
underscores your fear of autocracy and
megalomania and anything else that you
want to throw in that bucket so I'm I'm
totally with you there okay what's your
other
point people the reason that I said the
XC DK whatever cartoon
uh that you're going to shoot your
Society in the face is that that the
energy behind that cartoon is one of
sides one of like I I am perfectly happy
when I see somebody who disagrees with
me shut down oh yeah and I don't want
that I beg of everybody listening for
for just your own selfish reasons you
have to want the tension between sides I
think the question people ought to ask
is
why are there two sides whether that's
male female whether that's um liberal
conservative and from again me going
back to an evolutionary standpoint when
you think
about any social creature is going to
have to deal with the do you hold
everybody responsible and there's no
sense of collective anything it's just
hey you didn't do your thing I'm going
to let you starve to death I don't care
whatever or are you going to be just all
compassion and empathy all the time
where it's like no matter what you do
I'm going to take care of you and
protect you so if you don't act as a
group you're not going to be able to
cooperate your um like the the coolest
thing to think of is that if I hunt and
kill something I'm better off letting
you eat some of it than eat all of it
myself because I can literally store
calories on your body because now you'll
reciprocate right it is when I heard it
said like that I was like oh my God
that's so brilliant because I can only
store so much on my own body in one meal
otherwise I'm just going to excr it out
but if I let you eat some now I've
effectively stored calories on your body
and it's going to come to me the next
time when I miss the hunt so okay you
want to you want to have some amount of
like we're looking out for each other
this is a collective thing but then you
get the free rider problem where other
people then just become parasitic on the
organism and just like I'm not going to
do anything because you're going to take
care of me so you need Dynamic tension
So for anybody out there that has a
husband or a wife or boyfriend
girlfriend whatever and sometimes you
they're driving you mad I will remind
you you need the dynamic tension you
don't want to you want to share values
but you don't want to see the world the
same way you want to have this Dynamic
tension between I mean especially if
you're raising kids I don't have kids
full disclosure but like when you're
raising kids there's a reason that um
old school like back in the day 100,000
years ago uh that we don't know that
5,000 years ago hunter gatherer
societies you would go and uh on the day
of adulthood for a young boy he would
traditionally be with his mother and the
men would go ceremonially pull him away
from the mother to
demarcate that role your time with the
the feminine the soft the gentle the
nurturing that shit's over and now
you're going to go do something hard
we're going to take you out we're going
to make you hunt a line or whatever
their you know societal thing was and
you want both of those energies present
in that child you don't want them to
never have encountered that love and
that nurturing you know especially when
they're young and so wanting the tension
between the left and the right between
the liberal and the conservative you
have to want the tension yeah and my
problem is people don't want the tension
anymore they think their side is Right
whichever side both sides are as
ridiculous on this as the other but when
you want attention and I obviously
encounter this in my marriage and I
encounter this in business where you if
you've read the book Rocket Fuel you
have the Visionary and you have the
executor you need both both but they
often both think the other's a [__] and
you have to understand that you both
bring value it's the dynamic tension
it's like a kite in a string if you just
have a string it lays on the ground if
you just have a kite just crashes into a
tree and you have nothing but when you
have them in Dynamic tension you can
keep the kite aoft so much okay so much
to to build on here so first of all um
your your case that actually caring for
other people in your group is
evolutionarily adaptive um Darwin first
wrote about it Darwin like we think of
Darwin as the survival of the fittest
like oh we're we're evolutionarily
selected to be selfish Darwin wrote that
a tribe of uous would Outlast a tribe of
selfish people because the group that
puts the tribe first would ultimately be
victorious um David Sloan Wilson has
formalized this into a theory of group
selection which is um very parallel to
to your argument uh which I think is
fascinating
um the dynamic tension point I think is
so important um I I actually wrote a lot
about this and think again and the my
prior book and I I'm so stunned that
people want to surround themselves with
people who agree with their conclusions
instead of the ones who challenge their
thought process like I don't want you to
be like-minded great minds don't think
alike they challenge each other to think
differently you can be like-hearted
which is we have similar values that's
your point um but we want to have really
different views um and that Divergence
of views with similarity of values is is
where we do our best learning um we
don't just affirm our beliefs we
actually end up evolving our beliefs
based on that which last time I checked
is the only way you grow cognitively I
think the other the other thing that's
really interesting here so I want to
push back a little bit on the Free
Speech point I I I think we're we're in
actually in agreement on the principles
there's uh there's some evidence that
really got me thinking differently about
this a couple years ago uh Peterson um
the lead author I think is Michael bang
Peterson published eight studies showing
his middle name is bang I believe it is
it might be bong I think he's bang that
would be the greatest middle name of all
time uh I cannot confirm or deny the
pronunciation but uh he published eight
studies uh thousands of people looking
at the question of is social media
fundamentally worse than inperson
interaction just because people are
Anonymous or because they don't see a
human face and there's all this
evolutionary hand waving about how you
know we we were adapted to sit here like
this and talk to each other and we can
respect each other and like each other
but now we're behind a screen and maybe
behind a screen name and now like I'm
you know I no longer see you as a full
human well what the data showed is we
should not let that drive all of our
thinking because it turns out that the
people who are [__] online are also
[__] offline that's not too shocking
to be fair it's not surprising right
when you think about it um they tend to
be nastier um in real life too the
difference is in real life that behavior
is disincentivized you get excluded from
your group somebody takes you aside and
says that's not respectful um and you
learn to evolve it and social media I
think does the opposite which is our our
algorithms amplify outrage and so trolls
learn that they can use aggression to
get attention and then all of a sudden
this Behavior seems to be more common
and we think people are worse than they
are and that like I thought that was the
first problem that Elon was going to
solve to take us for a full circle on
the Elon conversation my dream for
Twitter was we are going to stop
amplifying trolls who are just using
aggression to get attention and we're
going to start amplifying people who
disagree thoughtfully who complexify
conversations who take what was you know
a simple belief in one person's head and
actually turn it upside down and say
there's another view to this and now you
don't just change your mind you actually
elaborate your thinking and you have a
more sophisticated understanding than
you did before that to me was the future
of we want to have a public a Public
Square that makes people smarter as
opposed to more tribal and more
polarized and to me a huge
disappointment is there's been no effort
to build that I don't think he ever will
and I don't think anyone will and the
reason I don't think that is I don't
think that's what people want so Elon is
very careful to say uh we want to
entertain and educate or inform uh and I
think that that is probably necessary
like you and I were talking before we
started rolling I had to pull my channel
back from becoming Doom and Gloom and
the reason is I have legitimate anxiety
about the future um when I look at at
things like AI which I really hope we
get a chance to talk about today uh and
I think that it's probably going to be
good but I think that there is a risk
that either it guts people's sense of
meaning or it actually destroys us and
anytime I would express my anxiety the
episode would blow up and so I'm like
huh that's you really have to fight
against that now because of what I want
to bring to the world I'm already
wealthy it became very simple for me to
say okay I'm I never going to
artificially lean into this when it's
real I will talk about it but I could
easily take something and spin it more
negative and it would do better um so
when I think about what people want I
was literally just thinking about this
today I don't know what I had this on my
mind but think about like the old
newspaper boys that had to like yell and
Shout um to to get people to buy the
newspaper you're in a way better
position if the Titanic just sank than
you are if the Titanic made it in record
time right so
there we are I'm pretty sure he talked
about this in the book we are more
likely to lean towards negative stuff so
it's like okay we're more likely to lean
towards negative stuff negative stuff is
also just it tends to be higher drama
more captivating and even I I hate that
this is true man but even I if I see two
people arguing I'm more likely to stop
than if they're like oh I love you so
much okay so I I think there's a false
dichotomy there so first of all I I
think you're right that I I wouldn't say
it is what people want I'd say it's what
people tend to so our our attention is
geared toward um what Rosen and royman
called negativity bias or B meister and
colleagues called bad is stronger than
good um and The evolutionary argument is
really simple if you if you didn't pay
attention to the good thing you could
still survive um if you ignored the bad
thing then you're not going to pass
along your jeans um because you got
eaten by a tiger or whatever it was
possible early on um so it makes sense
that we're wired to be hypervigilant to
threats um and we have an migdala that
that seems to function to do this very
primitive threat detection fight or
flight kind of stuff um that doesn't
mean though that we can't activate that
in a way that makes people smarter and
more thoughtful so if you respond to the
people who are having an argument we
can't say let's turn turn that into like
a worldclass debate um that that's like
the cognitive version of a WrestleMania
um match um maybe that's not the right
the right metaphor that's pretty good I
like that um it's fun right you know
they're actors but they still look like
they're they're really beating each
other up and they're working at it if
they weren't even actors they were just
legitimately going they're debating with
respect but like Lincoln Douglas style
like Lincoln Douglas is a great example
of a you know an amazing debate um what
we're looking for is basically the
intellectual version of why we watch
sports which is I I will I will turn on
any game that has step against LeBron um
I I will watch because you know these
are two people who are at the very top
of their field um who are genuinely
trying to to both put forth their best
effort and there's no reason I mean this
is part of why podcasting and YouTube
have taken off is people there's a
hunger there's a demand for these
conversations right and so why not build
an algorithm that penalizes people for
being uncivil but rewards them for being
constructively critical and for
challenging people to think differently
um you could try instead of a like
button a huh I never thought of it that
way that's actually interesting
maybe right this I don't know if this is
going to work but this the experiment
get people to engage because that
ultimately that's the test you know look
In fairness um they they do have to make
money because people want to get paid
for their work let's keep that in mind
um okay I think I have the Silver Bullet
as to why that's wrong tell
me movies no matter how uplifting the
ending and I went to film school they
used to beat this into US they've got to
be just High SE drama the most dramatic
high stakes high wire act now it doesn't
mean that you want attend badly you
don't you actually want it to end well
especially if you identify with the lead
but it needs to be
dramatic that is the thing that makes us
attend to it so I I'm not defending the
trolls that's probably just the easiest
way and I'm not a troll anybody can look
at my feet yeah that's the low hanging
fruit it's the lwh hanging fruit version
of getting to I want you to attend to
this thing it's people slinging mud
although In fairness like if people
are if people are dicks as I perceive it
I won't follow them but I'm sure there
are people who think elon's a dick and I
follow him so well you I think you've
made a calculus that you think his net
contribution to the world is positive
and you're willing to tolerate some of
the things you don't like I'll give you
I'll give you an even better one Jordan
Peterson very controversial figure has
added so much value to my life but I
really think he's bad on
Twitter Jordan I love you I want to get
you back on the show and I really mean
that like as a contributor to humanity
I've had him on the show a couple times
dude is amazing I legitimately have love
for what he's done I don't know him well
enough to actually love him but like for
real for real like this guy's out of
value to my life and I think to the
world but the way he is on Twitter uh is
not ideal from my perspective and so
that's one of those
where I wouldn't be traumatized
if there was a huh never thought of that
button and nobody was clicking it
because he's just coming at it from such
an angry place but I certainly wouldn't
want his account to be silenced or shut
down I'll give you another example of
somebody who I think is amazing but I'm
sure there are people that just want him
to shut up Eric Weinstein who is from a
sensemaking apparatus I think he's
another one Sam Harris Sam Harris has
become so controversial but man do I
think that guy thinks clearly and look
there are things I disagree with him
violently but I'm glad nobody's telling
him to shut up telling him to shut up
all the time but this is this is exactly
where where I've landed so I think Sam
is a really interesting example A lot of
people have objected because they
disagree with his conclusions and first
it was the the left because they thought
he was islamophobic and now it's the
right because they think he's um you
know drinking vaccine Kool-Aid right and
in both cases like I I want to listen to
the quality of somebody's thought
process and say before I know what their
conclusion is is this somebody who who
challenges me to think deeper and
broader um and and Sam has that impact
on me so I respect him as a thinker I
often disagree with his conclusions and
that's not the point right the point is
that he makes me think um I think that
you could probably try a version of this
so I I see your film example and I raise
you
school people like to learn you could
try a this person's thinking teaches me
um I feel smarter after listening to
this person um this person opened my
mind
right like that you could get people
fired up about that and you're right
we'd have to raise the stakes we need
really high importance issues uh that
people have serious emotions invested in
we need people who genuinely disagree
for good faith reasons um who could look
at the same evidence and actually agree
on the standards um and then maybe you
know one of them admits they're wrong or
they both realized they were wrong and
they had incomplete information I I I
don't think this is easy to do I think
it's it could be built and tested and I
don't know if I'm running a social media
company is the first experiment I'm
running cuz it's a huge differentiator
if it works yeah what would really be
interesting is if I have the option to
click oh I never thought of that I mean
I suppose this is a subscribe button but
uh that I can tailor the kinds of things
that I respond to so uh that and I mean
In fairness if you subscribe to the
right people and interact with the right
people over time the algorithm does
really begin to feed you this because I
actually don't see many trolls except in
my own comments uh for the most part
it's I'm going to see people people that
on my for you page anyway that are
positive that are thoughtful just
because of what I interact with but um
I'll I'll give you school and I'll Raise
You video games so we can agree on that
I when I look out at the world so impact
theory is called impact Theory uh for
one very simple reason it actually isn't
for the YouTube content it's my theory
is if you want to get a growth mindset
which we've talked about the limitations
of but if you want to get a growth
mindset out to people at scale I think
you have to do it through entertainment
and so the YouTube show I say only
addresses 2% of people and so the 2% the
self- select that go on YouTube and want
to learn are very different than the 98%
of people that I think one you have to
reach them when they're young which I
think is critically important and then
two you have to do it through
entertainment you have to create
something they think is cool that their
friends think is cool and that they
would do you know regardless like it's
just intrinsically enjoyable um and meet
them there so if if there were only one
door that kids could walk through door
one is education and door two is video
games chosing video games more people
not everybody thankfully um but more
people will just because it's so aligned
with the wiring of our brain and
dopamine secretion and all of that but
also really useful in a bunch of ways I
I I was stunned um to look up a bunch of
meta analyses studies of studies showing
that on average video games actually
build grid and willpower which I mean as
a kid who grew up playing video games
that was where I learned resilience was
where I learned to I loved your Mario
Kart example by the way thank you that I
mean it's it's really it's it's exactly
what I want to teach kids you fail you
get sent back to the beginning you have
to try again and level up your skills
and then there's a reward for it and
also the process is fun it's it's
deliberate play
um in a nutshell which is what you're
arguing for so you you want to talk
about AI I'm curious about where you
want to go on AI the future of work so
uh I there's a lot of anxiety right now
around AI I've done a fair amount of
content around it and the response that
people give is like okay wait how do I
thrive in this
world and because we do video games we
interface with art a lot artists have
really reacted violently against Ai and
for my second or third Public Service
Announcement I will say um artist I
really beg of you when I first
saw um Toy Story I was in film school
and when I say saw when it came out I
refused to go watch it because I was
like this will be the death of
traditional cell animation and I was
crestfallen it was a it was a skill that
I really wished I had a talent for
something I really loved and the thought
of like people aren't going to draw
anymore it's all going to be on a
computer I really had a negative
reaction and I probably didn't see Toy
Story for five years after it came out
and then I finally saw it and I was like
oh wow but it made me feel something and
so now obviously artists grow up with
Photoshop and all the tools that the
artists don't mind but they don't
realize that that's already like wiped
out a whole bunch of people that spent a
lot of time learning how to do with a
pencil and if artists understand that at
least from where I'm sitting the play is
and and I'll say this to anybody the
play is to figure out how AI can be a
tool that you use to not be less
creative you're going to be more
creative because now you're not limited
by the execution side of this you're
only limited by your imagination by what
you can think of and how you can execute
against that and I get it it's tough if
you spent a long time training yourself
to write like my angel
and now you can just go to chat GPT and
it can write like my Angelou boom licky
split um there is something unnerving
about that but the way that it lets all
of us amplify our
skills is
incredible MH so I I have heard you
previously say look I can't predict the
future and so I'm really not going to
take a super hard stance but I'd love to
hear like how you want people to at
least it is happening you don't have to
predict anything more than today to say
this is emotionally how you should frame
it yeah okay so a couple disclaimers
first of all I'm an organizational
psychologist I'm not a computer
programmer um I'm not a tech founder so
my perspective is informed by reading
the evidence um having studied work for
two decades and by having talked with
the founders of a bunch of the big um AI
companies if anybody tells you they know
where this is going they're lying um
it's changing so fast under their feet
that they're just kind of trying to to
keep up with the machine at this point
um in a lot of cases I think there are a
few things we can say are true right now
the first one is um Ethan mik has
summarized this point really beautifully
um he's probably my favorite thinker on
AI he has a book coming out in the
spring called co-intelligence uh and
he's the best synthesizer of the trends
that I've seen um what Ethan has
highlighted in is in a whole bunch of
experiments AI is basically a skill
leveler so if you are a poor performing
software engineer or salesperson or
knowledge worker of a whole bunch of
Kinds if you do a lot of writing it will
help you close the gap between you and
your star performing peers and in very
few of the studies does star performers
get much um out of it and they tend to
get a lot less uh than people who are
basically catching up so that's great
news if you're trying to get better um
it may not help you as much if you're
already really good at your job I think
the second thing we know is uh there are
reasons to be concerned because um I
think you you've accurately sort of
capture the history of technology which
is most new technologies displace jobs
they don't eliminate jobs um we see
certain kinds of jobs go away other jobs
come in to take their place what's
different about AI is machines have
never learned before and the idea that
you know that a machine can actually
keep getting smarter um is a threat to
jobs that people just can't predict
because it's a different it's it's why
it's called exponential technology right
um and so if there is an acceleration
toward General artificial intelligence I
think that's where people just say we've
never seen anything like this we don't
know what it will mean open question
third you you asked about purpose and
meaning and I I think here there's at
least some short to medium-term Good
News which is I just read a study of
what happens when people get AI tools
and robots in their jobs who didn't have
have them before and the one of the key
findings was this is over a multi-year
process uh people figure out what the
robots are bad at and then they make
outsmarting the robot part of their job
goal and that becomes a source of
meaning and purpose for them because
they've discovered what is uniquely
human at least now the problem is we
don't know what that's going to look
like in 2 years 5 years in 3 months
probably um it's sort of a giant
question mark and so I don't know how
we're going to think about that I think
you know my hope would be that if we get
to a point where you know computerss can
actually take over um a lot of jobs that
don't get replaced then we're going to
find some version of a universal basic
income that allows people to you know to
support their their life and their
lifestyle um and that frees people up to
do more play more social connection um
and Find meaning in other in other
sources um but I don't think we have a a
good model for what a society looks like
that yet that looks like that and so I
don't really know where to take it we
actually have more of a model than I
think people realize I was recently in
Kuwait yeah so in Kuwait everyone gets
Ubi so they're kicking off so much money
from oil that everybody gets uh stien
it's pretty
hefty I it's ballpark like $2,500 right
so it's not it's enough that your basic
needs are met but it's not enough that
if you want for the Finer Things that
you would have them and it plays out at
least according to the people that I
spoke to uh it plays out the way you
would think it would so people that
aren't ambitious now don't need to be
ambitious and they do nothing and they
collect their check and that's fine and
so some strata of society just stays at
like the that they're not reaching for
more uh the people that are ambitious
and really want to do something
extraordinary with their lives they're
going to reach Way Beyond that but
they're like well at least I have that
so do I think that I mean look some of
them were complaining saying yeah that's
a problem like people don't because
there is that net there more people than
would otherwise do nothing um but I
don't think I mean being in Kuwait it
was lovely it was beautiful people were
lovely the people I was talking to into
anyway we're very ambitious um so it's
not going to create our society by any
stretch of the imagination it really
comes down to how much we get now if
this world of abundance comes in and we
really don't want for anything then I
worry we have a rich kid problem where
you just have never had to work hard for
anything and going back to my earlier
thesis if I'm right that working hard is
just a critical part of this so few
people will need to work hard but there
will be profound sense of disease and
they won't understand why and this is
something I find really interesting so I
think right now what we're struggling
from in the US is that things have been
so good for so long for so many people
not everybody I'm very aware of that
trust me as somebody who's worked in the
inner cities I've seen this [__] up
close but even people in the grips of
poverty in America have refrigerators
have usually a home right so it's like
whatever if 96% of people have a home
that's a lot that's the vast majority
so it's been so good for so long for so
many people that we have fallen prey to
the fourth turning
of Hard Times make strong men strong men
make good times good times make weak men
and on and on the death Loop goes um so
I do worry about that that if it is
really just an age of abundance that you
get the kids that are doing coke at you
know 16 and they just derail yeah I
worry about that too I think I mean I
guess the good news on this is Humanity
has a really poor track record when it
comes to appreciating how good things
are yeah uh so do you see a way out of
it I don't know I'm sure we'll find ways
to screw up any version of abundance uh
that comes but then if your if your sort
of self-correcting cycle is right then
that will in turn create a generation of
motivated people um I think
the the the experimental evidence I've
seen on universal basic income is really
encouraging in the sense that most
people are not demotivated um most
people want either because they're you
know aspiring for more career-wise or
because they see their work as a calling
or because they're bored there are lots
of reasons um you know end up continuing
to engage I think where um where this
gets to me really interesting is I
wonder actually I don't know I don't
know what to make of this but curious to
get your reaction it seems to be the
case that when um when you look far
enough back in human history there was a
did you ever read James susman's book
work no he's an anthropologist um who
who has gone very far back into to human
history and argued that basically for
300,000 years we did a 15-hour work week
so this image of hunter gatherer life as
you know just nasty brutish and short
like there were elements of that were
extremely nasty you do not want to live
without modern medicine for example um
if you can avoid it but um they LED
mostly lives of leisure and they there
was like okay we're going to hunt we're
going to gather we're going to cook
we're going to cover our necessities and
the rest of the time you built Community
you did Art um there was a lot of
creativity and connection and so I
actually wonder if there's not a
blueprint for where this would go if it
went there from I guess a world a
different kind of abundance um an
abundance of time that we had for a lot
of our and ancestral past what do you
make of that uh I I think in movies and
video games so I will say Minecraft
gives you all the answers you seek uh in
the beginning it is deadly and the mere
existence of nighttime meant that your
risk of death skyrocketed yeah and so
there then you uh start as building
safety and then you start figuring out
the movement patterns of the elk or the
Buffalo or whatever and then you've got
a reasonable life of you move with the
herds or you sit down and you plant uh
and you harvest or you herd and but life
back in the day to your point one
without medicine you're just already in
a danger zone and then two we have
played a really dangerous game with
Evolution from a hip to head ratio for
women
and so child birth is about the most
dangerous thing that a human being could
do from an evolutionary standpoint but
you got to do it so now you've got
something where you have high infant
mortality rates uh mothers dying at I
mean some it it's ridiculously high
forget the percentage of death but it
was high and so that already just is one
of the reasons I think that humans had
to have this drive for improvement
because it was just like dude if you
didn't want to make things better then
every night people were getting eaten by
lions but because you're trying to
improve you're like hey wait a second
when we have a fire I think the Lions
actually stay a little bit back hey this
dog or wolf that's coming up and asking
for scraps they'll actually bark to
alert me when something comes near huh
this is all very interesting and so you
start putting these pieces together and
you start building I mean this is
anybody kids that grew up with Minecraft
take it for granted because I found it
at 47 I'm like holy hell this game is
unb believable it is brilliant a small
set of rules creates this unbelievably
unbelievably complex Behavior sets I
played it in isolation I had no idea
what it was I almost threw my controller
through the TV screen I was like they
expect kids to get good at this what
like this is so hard and then you
realize oh the zombies only come out at
night I didn't notice that okay days are
10 minutes long nights are 10 minutes
long oh [__] I need to build shelter
and all you start pieing this together
that is humanity and so we are on this
this March towards Improvement but we're
all living in the weird ass moment where
computers potentially become sentient
and we now have some
real potentially competition and so now
it's like all the things that got us
here aren't going to get us to the next
level and so it'll be very interesting
to see what plays out it will be
interesting I it's funny I think I
learned some of the same lessons from
playing Zelda um not not identical but
it overlaps a little bit with Minecraft
on on some of the themes you're talking
about I think yeah I I I think this is
one of the reasons that we we've talked
for Generations now about how cognitive
skills are what separate us from animals
as humans I think moving forward it's
probably character skills not cognitive
skills that are going to elevate us
above machines so here's what a machine
can't do um a machine can't decide what
values are worth prioritizing um a large
language model can basically take a
bunch of people's claims about what's
important to them and try to adjudicate
or rank them U but it can't decide for
you uh what principles should matter to
you and it definitely can't tell you how
to put those principles into practice
and live them and I wonder if that's
going to be the dividend uh where you
know if we're trying to think about what
advice do we give people who are
concerned about the future of work I
would say double down on character
skills um it's going to be much easier
for a machine to cover your coding and
your language skills um then it is for a
machine to teach you to be proactive um
to be pro-social um to be determined to
be disciplined uh I think those are
those are skills that are going to be
really hard to code and they are going
to help you unearth your hidden
potential Adam thank you for joining me
today where can people find you uh
wherever they're on the internet there
it is at Adam Grand everybody amazing
list of books you will love them all
speaking of things you will love if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace check out my intense
conversation with Patrick B David about
masculinity to truly be free you have to
be strong enough to control your own
life and many men today simply do not
qualify many of you have been told the
pursuit of power is disgusting you
shouldn't do it many of you don't even
have